okay we're now going to continue with
another method for text
now this is a much more general model
vector space model which is used not
only for text similarity but also in
many other applications in natural
language processing and information
retrieval so the vector space model
represents documents in a space a
multi-dimensional space where each term
is a dimension so this is used primarily
for representing food documents in
information retrieval scenarios so the
terms could be the worst that appear in
the document for example cat dog and
elephant and the documents are linear
combinations of vectors along the axes
so a document that contains for example
three instances of the word cat and one
instance of the word dog and one
instance of the word elephant would be
represented as the vector 3 1 1 in this
three dimensional space another document
it only has 4 instances of elephant and
no instance of the other 2 will have a
representation of 0 0 or 4 so document
similarity is used in information
retrieval to determine which document is
more similar to a given query so this is
one of the basic ideas in documentary TV
or in search engines so we have a query
such as the vector Q which is shown in
the middle of the slide and then 2
documents D 1 and D 2 and we want to
determine whether d1 or d2 is a better
match the query Q we should know that
queries and documents are represented in
the same space and that we can use the
angle between the vectors as a proxy for
their similarity so in this example the
similarity between D 1 and Q is
proportional to the angle alpha between
those two vectors and the similarity
between D 2 and Q is proportional to
theta which is the angle between those
two vectors a slightly better version of
similarities based on the cosine of that
angle so this is cosine of alpha versus
cosine of theta and then in this
quadrant they related in the same
direction so if the cosine is smaller
that means that the angle is also
smaller which also means that the
similarity is larger so small
anger means larger similarity so let's
see how cosine similarities are computed
mathematically the cosine is just the
normalized dot product of two vectors so
if you want to compute the similarity
within a document in a query we can just
divide the sum of the di q i4 Oh eyes in
the different dimensions of the vector
space where D sub I is the eighth
component of vector D and Q sub I is the
eyes component of vector Q and then we
need to normalize this by dividing the
sum by the lengths of the two vectors
and the lengths are computed by taking
the square of each of the dot product of
the vector by itself and then taking the
square root of that there's a variant of
course I'm called the jacquard
coefficient which is just the size of
the intersection of the two vectors
divided by the size of the union of the
two vectors let's look at some examples
now suppose that we have a document that
is represented as cat dog dog and cookie
that is represent as cat dog mouse mouse
so in this example the first dimension
is cat the second dimension is dog and
the third dimension is mass so the
vector representation of D is going to
be 1 2 0 the vector representation of Q
is going to be 1 1 2 and then we can
compute the similarity between D and Q
so we multiply pairwise the first
components of the vectors 1 times 1 plus
the product of the second components 2
times 1 plus the product of the third
components which is 0 times 2 that gives
us 3 in the numerator and then we
normalize by the product of the lengths
of the two vectors the length of the
first vector D is square root of 1
squared plus 2 squared plus 0 square or
square root of 5 and the length of the
second vector is square root of the sum
1 squared plus 1 square plus 2 square
which is a square root of 6 and if we
simplify the formula 3 divided by square
root of 5 times square root of 6 we get
that the cosine similarity between D and
Q is about 0.55 now let's see what
happens if
we compare a vector with itself so the
cosine similarity between D and itself
is 1 times 1 plus 2 times 2 plus 0 times
0 equals 5 in the numerator and then in
the denominator we have the square of
the length of the vectors and the
vectors are the same they each have
lengths of square root of 5 square root
of 5 squared is 5 and then if we
simplify the expression we get the
overall cosine similarity of D to itself
is 1 and this is the largest possible
similarity the smallest possible
similarity is going to be what what do
you think okay now let's try to do this
as an example we're given now 3
documents D 1 D 2 and D 3 and we want to
compute the cosine similarities between
D 1 and D 2 and then D 1 and D 3 so why
don't you compute those similarities and
think about the values that you get and
think why you're getting those values on
the next slide I'm going to show you the
answer over here the answers the
similarity between D 1 and D 2 is 1 and
let me go back to the previous slide to
remind you what those documents are D 1
is 1 3 and D 2 is 10 30 the similarity
between those two is 1 because they are
aligned in the exact same direction
therefore the angle between them is 0
which corresponds to the largest
possible cosine of 1 now if we compare D
1 and D 3 we're going to get a very
different similarity of 0.6 so swap in
the two dimensions between 1 3 & 3 1
actually results in a very different
value in this case it's your politics
but it could have been a much smaller
value so swapping the two dimensions
it's actually a bad thing you don't want
to do that whereas extending the vector
in a particular direction by multiplying
it with a scalar is actually something
that preserves document similarity so
one question for you now is what is the
range of values that the cosine score
can take there is one correct answer and
there's another one that is somewhat
correct but depending on the context it
won't be correct so think about it very
carefully so the answer is the
in general in mathematics the cosine
function has a range of minus one to
plus one however since we're dealing
with vectors that include counts of
words they are both in the first
quadrant and because of the word counts
are non-negative the range for the
cosine can only be 0 to 1 so the next
item that we are going to discuss today
is the vector space model as it is
applied to text similarity in particular
so first let's consider the idea of
distributional similarity the
distribution of similarity principle
tells us that two words that appear in
similar contexts are likely to be
semantically related for example I went
to a search engine and search for names
of words that appear together would
drive
I got scheduled test drive and
investigate Honda's financial options
Volkswagen debuted a new version of its
front wheel drive golf the jeep reminded
me of a recent drive and finally our
test drive took place at the wheel of a
loaded four DL mobile so you can see
that the word Drive appears in all those
sentences and a name of a car I also
appears in them so Honda Volkswagen Jeep
and Ford are related to each other
because they appear all near the word
Drive so this goes to an old principle
by first from of 1957 that says you will
know a word by the company it keeps so
this is a summary of the distribution of
similarity principle so what is the
context though the context of a word can
be anything it can be the word before
the target word the word after it any
word within n words of the target word
any word with a specific syntactic
relationship with the target word for
example the head of the dependency or
the subject of the sentence related to
the target word it can also be any word
within the same sentence and even any
word within the same document so for
example documents that talk about
hospitals and doctors and nurses are
very likely to contain the word patient
somewhere
so that means that they're all
semantically related now we're going to
continue in the few minutes with the
next segment on dimensionality reduction